elibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANDREU ET AL . 5o f1 4
TABLE 1 Summary of demographic information for both groups.
VariableMindfulness group
(n=24)Control group
(n=22)
Age M=9.9; SD=0.71 M=9.7; SD=0.70
Gender (%)
Females 62.5 63.6
Males 37.5 36.4
Family structure (%)
2 members 14.3 5.5
3 members 28.6 22.2
4 members 33.3 61.1
5 members 9.5 5.6
>5 members 14.3 5.6
Family month income (%)
<200 USD 0 11.8
200–400 USD 40.9 41.2
400–680 USD 45.5 41.2
680–1000 USD 13.6 5.8
secular mindfulness-based intervention for children ages 7–12 years
and is specifically designed to be implemented in a school context. The
general aim of the program is to foster the children’s development.
Specifically, the aims of the GrowingUp Breathing program are to (1)
increase mindfulness skills, (2) increase attention and self-regulation
processes (EF and emotion regulation), and (3) cultivate prosocial
(e.g., kindness, compassion) dispositions. The methodology of the pro-
gram is experiential, interactive, participatory, and student-centered.
It combines traditional third-person knowledge-based learning with
first-person experiential learning through mindfulness practices.
The GrowingUp Breathing program consists of nine 50-min ses-
sions, with one session being implemented each week. The nine
sessions are divided into three modules (Attention, Self-Regulation,
and Kindness modules), plus an integration and summary session.
Attentional training allows the improvement of self-regulation pro-
cesses, which increase the probability of reflexive, non-reactive, and
prosocial behaviors. In the Attention Module (3.5 sessions), children
learn what mindfulness is, how the attention works, and how to bring
it back when it wanders (attentional regulation). The core practices of
this module are mindfulness of Breathing, mindfulness of sounds, mind-
ful movement, body scan, and breathing space. In the Self-Regulation
Module (3.5 sessions), children learn self-regulation skills (decenter-
ing and de-identification) to manage unpleasant feelings, thoughts,
and emotions. Children learn to act reflexively and not impulsively.
In this module, the core practices are mindful eating, mindfulness of
thoughts and emotions, and breathing space (react vs. respond in dif-
ficult times). In the Kindness Module (1.5 sessions), children explore
how to take care of oneself and others. The core practices in this
module are loving-kindness and self-compassion meditation. Executive
functions are trained throughout the entire program, mainly through
formal meditation practices that are designed to train the contents ofeach module. In a previous qualitative study, children from the same
at-risk context report how the program helped them to have better
self-regulation (Andreu et al., 2021 ).
Other essential elements of the GrowingUp Breathing interven-
tion are the theoretical lessons, exercises, games, and weekly practice.
Weekly practices are divided into three different types of practice.
First, teachers receive mindfulness-mp3 audios to use it two times per
week before the next session with the children. Second, children carry
out Breathing Space Practice three times per day during school time.
Finally, between sessions, children are suggested to carry out different
practices (“challenges”) related to the content of the session.
Finally, a fundamental core practice for the learning process in
the GrowingUp Breathing program is the inquiry process. The inquiry
process is a central component in the pedagogy and methodology of
MBIs, and it is the catalyst that encourages reflection and exploration
through instructor-student-group dialogue. Through mindful teach-
ing (calm, clear, and kind), the instructor promotes an emotionally
supportive classroom climate, which encourages students to engage
in mindfulness practices and to share and reflect in the group. The
program was taught by an experienced psychologist and mindfulness
instructor and was provided universally to children as part of their
standard classroom instruction during regular school hours. Details of
each session of the program (objectives, themes, core practices, and
weekly practices) can be found in the Table S1.
2.3.2 Active control group: Skills-for life program
Children of the active control group received an adapted version of the
Skills-for Life (SFL) Program (Ministry of Education of Chile, 2018 ). SFL
is Chile’s government-funded universal prevention program developed
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License