elibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6o f1 4 ANDREU ET AL .
for the promotion of social-emotional competencies and academic out-
comes, prevention of mental health problems, and improvement of
positive coexistence in the educational community. SFL is run by a
division (National Association of School Assistance and Scholarship
JUNAEB; Junta Nacional de Auxilio Escolar y Becas) of the National
Department of Education in Chile, and it is the largest school-based
mental health program in Chile providing services to more than one
million students in Chile over the past decade (Guzmán et al., 2015 ).
The program is specially designed to be implemented in schools with a
population with high socio-economic vulnerability and high psychoso-
cial risk levels. The SFL Program has been shown to decrease the
risk factors associated with school and social maladjustment and to
improve studentst’ autonomy, socio-emotional skills, behavior, and aca-
demic outcomes (Delgado et al., 2006 ; Guzmán et al., 2015 ; Leiva et al.,
2016 ; Murphy et al., 2014 ).
For this study, two expert psychologists trained in the SFL Pro-
gram adapted the program to be implemented with children aged
9–11 years. The curriculum was applied during nine weekly sessions,
50 min per each, in parallel to the mindfulness-based intervention.
The methodology of the program was experiential, interactive, partic-
ipatory, and student-centered. The objective of the program was the
promotion of social-emotional skills other than mindfulness and the
improvement of the classroom climate. Through different dynamics
(e.g., role-playings) and games (e.g., collective mandala), the students
reflected in each class on a specific topic and developed emotional
and social skills useful for their school and family context. The themes
of the nine sessions were: Group Cohesion, Self-concept, Self-esteem,
Treating others well, Cyberbullying, Emotional recognition, Emotional
expression, Conflict resolution (dialogue) and Summary and Integra-
tion. Details of the intervention can be found in the Table S2.
2.4 Measures
2.4.1 Go/Nogo task
A previous Go/Nogo task was adapted for this study (Albert et al.,
2013 ). Stimuli consisted of three capital letters (“N,” “M,” and “W”) col-
ored in yellow so they clearly highlighted from the black background on
which they were superimposed. Children participants were instructed
to press a button, as fast and accurate as possible, whenever the let-
ters “M” or “N” were presented, and to withhold pressing when the
letter presented was “W.” They were asked to look continuously at
the center of the screen in order to control eye-movement interfer-
ence. The Go/Nogo task consisted of two blocks of 150 trials, with rest
time between blocks. Each trial began with the presentation of the let-
ter (400 ms), followed by a black screen (700 or 900 ms). Both letter
and fixation cross were superimposed at the center of the black back-
ground. The letters “M” (infrequent-Go) and “W” (infrequent-Nogo)
were presented with the same probability of occurrence (20%) in order
to equalize both types of trials with respect to novelty processing. The
letter “N” (frequent-Go) was presented in the rest of the trials (60%)
to increase the subjects’ tendency to respond. The three types of trials(frequent-Go, infrequent- Go, and infrequent-Nogo) were presented
in semi-random order (i.e., avoiding the consecutive presentation of
two infrequent-trials). Before the beginning of the experiment, partic-
ipants completed a practice block of 12 trials (4 infrequent-Nogo) to
ensure task instruction understanding. The task took about 10 min to
complete, including resting time. After the Go/Nogo task participant
completed an Eriksen flanker task adapted for children but results are
not reported here.
2.4.2 Questionnaires
Child and Adolescent Mindfulness Measure (CAMM)
Dispositional mindfulness was measured by the Child and Adoles-
cent Mindfulness Measure (CAMM; Greco et al., 2011 ). The CAMM
assesses mindfulness as the “lack of present-moment awareness as
well as judgmental and non-accepting responses to thoughts and feel-
ings” (Greco et al., 2011 , p. 609). It comprises 10 items (e.g., “I get upset
with myself for having feelings that do not make sense” or “get upset
with myself for having certain thoughts’’) in a 5-point Likert scale rang-
ing from 0 (”never true“) to 4 (”always true"). After recoding the scores
on inverse items, higher scores on the CAMM indicate higher mind-
fulness skills. In this study, Spanish validation of the CAMM was used
(García-Rubio et al., 2019 ), showing adequate reliability ( α=0.84).
Early Adolescent Temperament Questionnaire-Revised (EATQ-R)
EC were self-reported by children using The Early Adolescent Temper-
ament Questionnaire-Revised (Ellis & Rothbart, 2001 ). The EATQ-R is
a revised and updated version of the EATQ (Capaldi & Rothbart, 1992 )
to assess more precisely aspects of self-regulation. EATQ-R consists
of 11 scales. In this study, the higher-order factor EC was calculated
with the attentional control and inhibitory control subscales. EC is
a very close construct to EF (Snyder et al., 2015 ) and is defined as
“the ability to inhibit a dominant response to perform a subdominant
response” (Rothbart & Bates, 2006 ; p. 137), involving the recruitment
of attentional and behavioral processes to modulate affective reactiv-
ity (Rueda, et al., 2005 ). Each item was measured on a five-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (almost never true) to 5 (almost always true).
Higher scores reflect higher abilities. In the sample of this study, the
reliability of the EC was α=0.64.
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function, second
edition—Teacher form (BRIEF2-Teacher form)
EFs were measured using the BRIEF2-Teacher Form (Gioia et al., 2015 ;
Maldonado et al., 2017 ). The BRIEF2- Teacher Form is a teacher report
that measures the EF of children and adolescents aged 5–18 years.
Specifically, the BRIEF-2 – Teacher Form evaluates everyday children
and adolescents’ observable behaviors associated with EF in school
environments. It comprises 63 items in which respondents record their
answers via a Likert type format with N (“Never”), S (“Sometimes”),
or O (“Often”), reflecting the frequency to which the child being eval-
uated performs an indicated behavior. The scale assesses the Global
Executive Composite (Executive Function, EF), which is composed of
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License