overned by the applicable Creative Commons License

4o f1 4 ANDREU ET AL .
FIGURE 1 Flow chart for participants in the study. This includes enrollment, allocation and analysis of the participants. Reasons for exclusion
are mentioned.
sample for all analysis presented in this report consisted of 24 children
in the mindfulness group and 22 children in the active control group,
after participant elimination. As recommended in the literature, only
correct trials were analyzed for Go/Nogo EEG activity, and to ensure
an appropriate signal to noise ratio, a minimum of 15 artifact-free trials
per condition was set as a criterion for inclusion in the analysis (Hus-
ter et al., 2013 ; Rietdijk et al., 2014 ). Therefore, the main reasons for
excluding participants were a high task error rate and/or a high number
of trials with large artifacts that cannot be corrected by the Indepen-
dent Component Analysis (ICA) procedure, leaving too few correct
trials (less than 15) for analysis (please see Behavioral and EEG Data
Analysis section for the complete procedure of data analysis). A dia-
gram of the participant flow through the study is shown in Figure 1.A
summary of demographic information for the subsample used in this
study can be seen in Table 1. No significant pre-test differences were
identified between groups (all p>0.05).
2.2 Procedure
After the collection of baseline data, randomization to study condition
was done via a coin flip that assigned two of the four classrooms (one
from 4th and one from 5th grade) to receive the MBI and two to receive
the program that focused on the promotion of social skills (active con-
trol group). At pre-test, all procedures were explained to participants,
and informed consent/assent was obtained before. Before and after
interventions, EEG and questionnaire data were collected. For EEG
data, participants were tested individually during school hours using aBiosemi EEG system mounted in a private and quiet room on school
premises. Participants were asked to come to their testing sessions
with clean, dry hair and not to use any hair products or conditioner.
The same procedure was repeated after the intervention period (post
time). EEG signals were recorded using a Biosemi Active-Two ampli-
fier system and 32 scalp Ag/AgCl electrodes mounted in an elastic cap
according to the 10–20 system. Four additional electrodes were fixed
on the left and right mastoids and below and above the left eye (VEOG).
All signals were digitized with a sampling rate of 2048 Hz and 24-
bit A/D conversion. For questionnaires, the children self-reports were
administered by researchers during school hours. Teachers of each
classroom supervised the administration, which took approximately 45
min to complete each assessment. Also, the headteachers completed
the EF reports of each child in their classrooms. The headteacher took
approximately 15 min to complete each child report at both pre-test
and post-test and received a total of 380 dollars in compensation for
their time.
2.3 Mindfulness-based intervention and control
intervention
2.3.1 Mindfulness-based intervention: Growingup
breathing program
The experimental group received the mindfulness-based program
GrowingUp Breathing (García-Rubio & Luna-Jarillo, 2017 ; García-
Rubio & Luna-Jarillo, 2019 ). GrowingUp Breathing is a manualized
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License