overned by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANDREU ET AL . 3o f1 4
2004 , p. 174). Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) are sustained
and systematic training in formal and informal practices of mindful-
ness meditation to improve mindfulness skills. MBIt’s participants learn
a more adaptive way to relate to their feelings, thoughts, and emo-
tions supporting the development of greater attentional, emotional
and behavioral self-regulation, as well as positive prosocial qualities
such as kindness and compassion (Crane et al., 2017 ). In the last decade,
interest in mindfulness-based interventions applied in educational set-
tings have had a rapid expansion, accompanied by the exponential
growth of empirical research documenting the benefits of mindfulness
practices in schools (for a review, see Weare, 2019 ).
Theoretically, MBIs in schools have an impact on increasing both EFs
and mindfulness skills (Andreu & García-Rubio, 2019 ;L a w l o r , 2016 ;
Lyons & DeLange, 2016 ; Mendelson, et al., 2010 ; Mind and Life Educa-
tion Research Network, 2012 ; Waters, et al., 2014 ) .I nt h es a m el i n e ,
mindfulness skills in children have been positively related with EFs,
particularly inhibitory control (Riggs et al., 2015 ). Furthermore, recent
systematic reviews and meta-analyses have found positive effects of
MBIs on EFs in children and adolescents (Dunning et al., 2018 ;M a k
et al., 2018 ; Maynard et al., 2017 ). For example, teacher-reported
improvements in adolescents EFs have been shown with a school-
based mindfulness intervention (Lam & Seiden, 2020 ). However, Felver
et al. ( 2015 ) warned that most of the studies in the field did not use rig-
orous experimental designs: lacked active control groups, used a single
informant (typically only children), used a single methodology (typi-
cally self-reports), and did not use multi-level measurements to assess
outcomes (neural, cognitive, behavioral). Specially significant was the
shortage of studies designed to elucidate the impact of MBIs in school
on the neural correlates of core cognitive functions in development,
such as EFs.
The use of electroencephalography (EEG) to evaluate the neuronal
correlates of EFs is well established in adults and children. EEG and the
event-related potentials (ERPs) methodology provide several advan-
tages for the neurocognitive research on EFs (Huster et al., 2013 ;
Kaunhoven & Dorjee, 2017 ; Sanger & Dorjee, 2015 ). The Go/Nogo
task, one of the most classic paradigms used to investigate EFs in the
laboratory, has been particularly relevant for the study of neural corre-
lates of inhibitory control. Behavioral indices in a Go/Nogo task include
the omission errors in Go trials and the commission errors in Nogo
trials, which require inhibitory control ability, as well as the reaction
times (RTs) to different types of trials. One proposed ERPs neural cor-
relate of inhibitory control that reflect changes in brain activity needed
to inhibit response in a Go/Nogo task is the P3 component (Huster
et al., 2013 ). Indeed, the P3 is thought to reflect represent a tempo-
rally precise neural marker of the response inhibition process (Albert
et al., 2013 ; Dykstra et al., 2020 ; Sánchez-Carmona et al., 2016 ;W e s -
sel & Aron, 2015 ). Differential amplitudes of P3 are described both
on several EF disorders in adults and children (Luijten et al., 2014 ;
Lopez-Martin et al., 2015 ).
Several studies have employed experimental tasks to measure the
impact of mindfulness trainings in children (e.g., Felver et al., 2014 ;
Napoli et al., 2005 ; Schonert-Reichl et al., 2015 ), yet only a few have
used EEG or ERP methodology. Siripornpanich et al. ( 2018 ) assessed
children who have been studied in two schools with different typesof school curriculum: mindfulness-based curriculum (i.e., mindfulness
practices for all levels of education) versus usual curriculum. Chil-
dren who received the mindfulness education curriculum showed
lower theta power and smaller theta/beta ratio compared to control
children, suggesting enhanced maturation of brain areas related to
cognitive control and self-regulation. However, in the absence of a
randomization process, and the lack of baseline levels of children in
the two groups, the possibility that these differences existed previ-
ously between groups or were due to other elements of the curricula
could not be excluded. In another study with adolescents, the ampli-
tude of the P3b component was measured during an affective oddball
task, before and after mindfulness training. The P3b amplitude in the
control group decreased between testing sessions but it remained
unchanged in the mindfulness group, suggesting a maintained sensitiv-
ity to emotional stimuli in mindfulness-trained students (Sanger et al.,
2018 ).
Thus, as previous studies are done in adolescents, to our knowledge
there are no published studies who have specifically used ERP meth-
ods in children to evaluate possible effects of MBIs in schools on EFs
or other cognitive processes. The main aim of the present study was
to assess the impact of a school-based mindfulness intervention on the
neural correlates of EFs, specifically inhibitory control, in children. Via
a randomized controlled trial, we examined the effectiveness of an MBI
in 4th and 5th grade children attending a school identified as vulnerable
due to its low SES. We measured behavioral and EEG neural responses
on a Go/Nogo task to evaluate inhibitory control. We expected lower
error rates and decreased reaction times together with an increase
in P3 amplitude (particularly in No-Go trials) in the MBI intervention
group compared to the control group. Also, we measured the impact of
the MBI on children’s mindfulness skills via self-report and EFs’ via self-
and teachers-reports. We expected improvements in mindfulness skills
and EFs in children in the MBI group compared to children in the active
control intervention.
2 METHOD
2.1 Participants
Prior to participant recruitment, the Ethics Committee of the Pon-
tificia Universidad Católica de Chile approved the study. The school
in which the study took place was selected based on a low-SES and
vulnerable context. According to the Chilean Index of Scholar Vulner-
ability, the school was rated with an index of 74%, which corresponds
to a medium-high risk of vulnerability. The aim of the study was pre-
sented to teachers, students, and students from four 4th and 5th grade
classrooms were recruited (age range 9–11 years old).
The total sample for the global study was N=133 (67 in the mindful-
ness group). From this initial group, 68 children were chosen at random
(N=68; 34 from the mindfulness group) to become part of this EEG
study, and were subsequently evaluated with EEG. The results of the
pre-post EEG and questionnaires of this sample are presented here.
Of the 68 children who were evaluated with EEG, 46 remained in the
final sample, and the data of 22 children were discarded. Thus, the final
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License