overned by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANDREU ET AL . 7o f1 4
three composite indexes and nine subscales: Behavior Regulation Index
(BRI; comprised of the Inhibit and Self-Monitor subscales), Emotion
Regulation Index (ERI; comprised of the Shift and Emotional Control
subscales), and Cognitive Regulation Index (CRI; comprised of the Initi-
ate, Working Memory, Plan/Organize, Task-Monitor, and Organization
of Materials subscales). The Global Executive Composite, the Behav-
ior Regulation, the Emotion Regulation, and the Cognitive Regulation
Indexes were analyzed. The Behavioral Regulation Index indicates the
teacher’s perception of the child’s level of difficulty in regulating and
supervising their behaviors effectively. The Emotion Regulation Index
reports the teacher’s perception of the child’s ability in regulating and
modulating emotional responses, especially in response to changing
situations. The Cognitive Regulation Index reflects the child’s abil-
ity to control and manage cognitive processes and to problem solve
effectively. Higher scores indicate greater problems in EF and lower
scores reflect better EFs. The BRIEF2 – Teacher Form is widely used
and has shown adequate validity and reliability properties ( α=0.88–
0.98) (Gioia et al., 2015 ; Maldonado et al., 2017 ). BRIEF2 – Teacher
Form has demonstrated a significant correlation with the ADHD-RS-
IV, CBCL-TRF, BASC-2 TRS, and Conners 3-T(S) measures, which are
widely used to assess children’s attention, self-regulation and mental
health (for a review, see Hendrickson & McCrimmon, 2018 ). In the sam-
ple of this study, the reliability of the BRIEF-2 – Teacher Form was
excellent ( α=0.97).
Attendance, acceptability, and personal practice
Participants’ attendance rate to the program was determined by con-
trolling the number of sessions that each student missed (i.e., none, one,
two, three, or more sessions). Also, children assessed acceptability and
satisfaction with the programs at the end of them. Each student rated
3 items on a 0–10 Likert scale (i.e., Did you like the mindfulness/skills
for life program?; Would you recommend a mindfulness/skills for life
program to a friend?; Did you find helpful the mindfulness/skills for life
program?; 0 =Never; 10 =Always). In addition, the personal practice
was assessed asking the children about if they had been used the prac-
tices and exercises taught throughout the programs: Have you used
in your day-to-day in and outside the school (e.g., home) what you
learned on the mindfulness/skills for life program; Have you used inter-
sessions the different practices learned on the mindfulness/skills for
life program?; 0 =Never; 10=Always).
2.5 Data analysis
2.5.1 Behavioral and EEG data analysis
For EEG, after acquisition, data were segmented in epochs of 1 s
(200 ms before and 800 ms after stimulus onset) and only trials
with valid responses were analyzed (correct go trials with responses
between 150 and 1100 ms after onset, correct nogo trials without
response). Data were low-pass filtered below 35 Hz and re-referenced
to the average mastoids. Artifact rejection was based on a three-step
procedure. First, we used Independent Component Analysis (ICA) toremove eye-blinks or muscular activity, since it uses spatial filtering
and preserves ERP contributions, in contrast to other methods such
as filtering or regression (Jung, Makeig, Humphries, et al., 2000 ; Jung,
Makeig, Westerfield, et al., 2000 ). Then, noisy channels were interpo-
lated using data of adjacent electrodes (mean ±SD of interpolated
electrodes per participant and time: 2.2 ±1.9). Finally, trials in which
the EEG signal exceeded ±150 mV after baseline correction ( −200 to
0 ms) were automatically excluded. Only participants with at least 15
error-free trials per condition were analyzed, yielding a final sample
of 46 participants (see Participants section for a detailed description;
the number of trials did not differ between groups in any condition at
either pre or post-test, all ps>0.05). ERP waves were computed for
each condition (Go frequent, Go infrequent and Nogo), participant (46),
and time (pre and post). Then, ERP data across participants was decom-
posed by ICA (3 conditions ×46 participants ×2 times ERPs for each
electrode). The resulting independent components were explored by
means of visual inspection, identifying a meaningful component as P3
based on its scalp topography and time course. For the analysis, the
average of amplitude of the P3 maximum amplitude time point ±10 ms
was used.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used with Group (mindfulness-
training vs. active control group) and Time (pre, post) in all analyses
as factors. For behavioral data, percentage error rates (both omis-
sions and commissions: no responses in Go trials and button presses
in Nogo trials, respectively) and mean reaction times (RTs) for the
correct frequent and infrequent-go trials were analyzed. Repeated-
measures ANOVAs on each behavioral measure were carried out using
Trial type (frequent-Go, infrequent-Go, infrequent-Nogo), Group and
Time as factors. To examine the effects of mindfulness training on Nogo
P3, we conducted repeated-measures ANOVA, with Group and Time as
factors. The Greenhouse–Geisser (GG) epsilon correction was applied
to adjust the degrees of freedom of the F ratios where necessary,
and post hoc comparisons were also made in order to determine the
significance of pair-wise contrasts applying the Bonferroni procedure
(alpha 0.05). For all analyses, the level of significance employed was
0.05. Effect sizes were computed using the partial eta-square ( ƞ2p). For
interpreting effect sizes, Cohen’s ( 1988 ) cutoff criteria were followed:
ƞ2p=0.01 as small effect size, ƞ2p=0.06 as medium effect size, and
ƞ2p=0.14 as large effect size.
2.5.2 Questionnaires data analysis
Relative to self-reports completed by children, there was no attrition
from pre to post-interventions (Nexp =24; Ncon=22). With regard
to questionnaires completed by teachers, questionnaires for three chil-
dren were not completed at post-intervention (i.e., the questionnaires
of two children from the mindfulness group and one child from the con-
trol group were not completed). Hence, we decided to exclude these
participants from the teacher reports analysis (Nexp =22; Ncon=21).
We used the SPSS Missing Value Analysis package to estimate the
patterns of missing data for children and teachers. Little’s MCAR
test (Little & Rubin, 1989 ) was not significant for child self-report
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License