overned by the applicable Creative Commons License

ANDREU ET AL . 11 of 14
increased P3 amplitude on Nogo trials, compared to children in the
active control condition, who showed a minor decreased amplitude
over time. A previous study with the same Go/Nogo task indicated
that the frontocentral P3 showed larger amplitudes for Nogo than
for infrequent Go trials, suggesting that Nogo P3 is the ERP activ-
ity most associated with inhibitory control (Albert et al., 2013 ). Our
results showed, for the first time, a specific mindfulness-related effect
in this inhibition-related neural activity in youth, which would indi-
cate increased inhibitory control in children after an MBI. Increased
inhibitory control in children after a MBI was shown previously only
with behavioral or self-reported data (Mak et al., 2018 ; Schonert-
Reichl et al., 2015 ). In adolescents, previous EEG studies have shown
changes in P3b amplitudes after MBI but using tasks that measure
different cognitive/affective processes which are not comparable to a
pure inhibitory control task such as Go/Nogo (Sanger & Dorjee, 2015 ;
Sanger et al., 2018 ). Given the importance of inhibitory control in chil-
dren and specially in our particular population of high-risk children, we
considered that our results are extremely relevant.
Questionnaires data from multiple informants (children and teach-
ers) supports our behavioral and EEG results. Self-reported results
from children showed increased EC in the mindfulness-training group
compared with control group over time and a significant intervention
effect on mindfulness, showing a slight increase in mindfulness for the
intervention group and a significant decrease in mindfulness in the
control group. Although it may be counterintuitive to see a drop of
mindfulness in the control group, these findings may be interpreted
within the context of the cognitive changes that occur during the devel-
opmental period of early adolescence—ages 9–13 years. Specifically,
early adolescence in particular has been described as a time in the life
cycle in which there is heightened self-consciousness due to increased
competence in cognitive and social cognitive abilities (Schonert-Reichl,
1994 ) and information processing. Developmental changes may lead to
increased attention and reflection on the self, which may then direct
the early adolescent to adopt a more critical view of the self (Eccles &
Roeser, 2009 ) and a subsequent drop in present-moment awareness
as well as judgmental and non-accepting responses to thoughts and
feelings. Hence, this drop in mindfulness in the control group may be
reflective of the typical developmental trajectory of early adolescents.
The mindfulness intervention may have staved off this typical decline
in dispositional mindfulness for students in the intervention group.
Assessments from teachers showed increased behavioral regulation,
emotion regulation, and global executive functioning in children of the
mindfulness group compared to controls over time. Collectively, the
results suggested increased EFs, particularly inhibitory and attentional
control in vulnerable children after the mindfulness-based interven-
tion. Previous studies have shown improved EFs in children after MBIs
in schools (Mak et al., 2018 ; Schonert-Reichl et al., 2015 ). Execu-
tive functioning has been distinguished in “hot and cool”: top-down
processes that operate in emotionally significant situations versus
affectively neutral contexts (Zelazo & Carlson, 2012 ). It is interesting to
see that the concept of hot EF suggests that motivationally significant
contexts demand different top-down processes than neutral contexts.
Following this distinction, the electrophysiological results observedin the Go/Nogo task clearly correspond to cool EF while the results
reported by teachers may be associated with hot EF, where children
were evaluated in emotionally challenging situations (particularly with
inhibition and emotional regulation subscales of the BRIEF). This may
explain the absence of behavioral outcomes in the Go/Nogo task, sug-
gesting that brain-related effects were not sufficient to see changes in
behavioral cold EFs, but instead translated into changes in hot EFs. If
this is true, our results point toward brain changes in the cool EF sys-
tem that may support behavioral changes in hot EF, important for daily
life situations and crucial in high-risk contexts for children.
The present study used a longitudinal design with an active con-
trol group, which allows us to draw conclusions about causality and
control the non-specific effects, confirming that the reported effects
are related to the training of mindfulness per se. Additionally, the use
of multiple levels of measurements (questionnaires, behavioral tasks,
electrophysiological recordings) and several informants (children and
teachers) allow us to draw stronger conclusions. Despite this, our study
is limited since only one school was part of the study making difficult
to generalize the results. The sample size is a common challenge and
limitation of the field of EEG studies with children, where a high num-
ber of participants are expected to be eliminated due to eye and/or
head movements that cannot be corrected. Therefore, it is likely that
the most restless children are not included in the final samples of EEG
studies. Future work should replicate our study with an increased num-
ber of participants and schools. Also, longer interventions would be
useful to determine the time-line effects of mindfulness on EFs in high-
risk contexts. Lastly, we did not have a follow-up measurement due
to the difficulties of collecting EEG data and did not include parents,
teachers, and the school community in the interventions, limiting the
sustainability of the improvements obtained.
To conclude, children from vulnerable contexts who participate
in a school-based mindfulness intervention displayed improved exec-
utive functioning, inhibitory control and attention at the reported
and behavioral level, which was accompanied by increased Nogo P3
amplitude, compared to an active control group. Together, our results
showed that mindfulness trainings in schools improve EFs and partic-
ularly inhibitory control in high-risk children, providing them crucial
abilities for a healthier development and preventing future problems.
We hope this research will help advance the science and practice
of school mindfulness-based preventive interventions that will help
vulnerable children flourish.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A special appreciation is expressed to the children who participated in
the study, as well as to their parents, teachers and all the school com-
munity; all of whom made this study possible. Also, a special thanks to
all research assistants for their valuable help in the different phases
of this project. This study was funded by the Mind and Life Europe
Institute by a Varela Awards given to CIA and CGR [Grant #2016-
EVarela-Garcia Rubio, Carlos and Andreu, Catherine]. This work was
supported by the Fund for Innovation and Competitiveness (FIC) of the
Chilean Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, through the
Millennium Scientific Initiative, Grant [IS 130005—MIDAP to CIA] and
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License