al/desc 1o f1 4
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.13403

2o f1 4 ANDREU ET AL .
Research Highlights
∙This study investigated the effects of a mindfulness-based intervention in children
from a low socioeconomic status school on neural correlates of EFs.
∙Children performed a Go/Nogo task while electroencephalographic activity was
recorded and completed questionnaires before and after a MBI or an active control
program.
∙Improvements in EFs assessed by questionnaires together with an increased Nogo-
P3 activity associated with successful inhibition in children who received the MBI
were found.
∙The results could contribute to understand how mindfulness practice can promote
the development of inhibitory control in children from vulnerable populations.
1 INTRODUCTION
Socioeconomic status (SES), a measure of one’s overall status and posi-
tion in society, strongly influences an individual’s experiences from
childhood and through adult life. Growing up in a family with a low
SES background is associated with substantially worse health and
impaired psychological well-being, and decreased cognitive and emo-
tional development throughout the lifespan, being considered as a
risk factor for a healthy development (Hackman et al., 2010 ). Com-
pared with children and adolescents from higher-SES backgrounds,
children and adolescents from low-SES backgrounds show higher rates
of depression, anxiety, attention problems, and conduct disorders, and
a higher prevalence of internalizing and externalizing behaviors, all of
which increase with the duration of living in poverty (Hackman et al.,
2010 ). In addition, childhood SES influences cognitive development:
SES is positively correlated with intelligence and academic achieve-
ment from early childhood and through adolescence (Farah et al., 2006 ;
Hackman & Farah, 2009 ).
Childhood SES affects some neurocognitive systems more than
others: studies that assessed multiple neurocognitive systems found
moderate effects of SES on executive functions (EFs) — particu-
larly on working memory and inhibitory control (Hackman & Farah,
2009 ; Hackman et al., 2010 ; John et al., 2019 ). SES-related differ-
ences in the EFs of working memory and inhibitory control have been
noted in children as young as 6 −14 months of age (Hackman et al.,
2015 ). SES- related differences in executive attentional systems have
been reported in 6-year-old children, and SES-related disparities in
various tasks of executive function have been described at multi-
ple developmental stages through early adolescence (Hackman et al.,
2015 ).
EFs refer to a group of cognitive control abilities that organize,
sequence, and regulate behavior (Diamond, 2013 ; Schonert-Reichl
et al., 2015 ). One core EF is inhibitory control, which refers to the
capacity to control one’s attention, behavior, thoughts, and/or emo-
tions to handle a strong internal predisposition and respond in a willful
and non-reactive way (Diamond, 2013 ). More broadly, self-regulation
involves the use of inhibitory control and is highly related witheffortful control (EC), a temperamental predisposition for better or
worse self-regulation (Checa et al., 2014 ; Diamond, 2013 ). Children
with poor EFs (particularly inhibitory control) have been shown to have
poorer outcomes in adulthood such as having worse health, impaired
self-regulation (Rueda et al., 2005 ), lower prosocial behaviors (Aguilar-
Pardo et al., 2013 ), are less happy, commit more crimes, and develop
several EFs disorders (Diamond & Lee, 2011 ; Moffitt et al., 2011 ). In
fact, EFs are critical for every aspect of life, including success in school,
academic abilities, positive friendships, mental and physical health, and
overall quality of life (Diamond & Lee, 2011 ). Thus, improving EFs early
in life is crucial (Diamond & Lee, 2011 ). EFs are malleable from an early
age, and children with the weakest EFs show the most significant bene-
fits from any intervention to train EFs (Diamond, 2013 ; Diamond & Lee,
2011 ). Importantly, school-based interventions improve EFs (Diamond,
2012 ;L i e w , 2011 ; Meltzer, 2018 ).
The school is an active critical agent of development and a trans-
formative context (Erikson, 1987 ; Mills, 2008 ). One of the functions
of schooling is to reduce social inequalities by providing all children
with academic and social and emotional skills to diminish gaps in SES
and overcome them (Downey et al., 2004 ; von Hippel, et al., 2018 ).
Schools in the 21st century play a key role in the development of differ-
ent cognitive and social and emotional abilities (Mind & Life Education
Research Network, 2012 ), and the comprehensive mission of schools is
to educate students to be knowledgeable, responsible, socially skilled,
healthy, caring, and contributing citizens. Given the large amount of
time that youth spend in school, this is an ideal context to implement
universal prevention programs that address core elements of social,
emotional, and cognitive development (Hale et al., 2014 ), including the
promotion of students’ EFs.
School-based social and emotional learning (SEL) interventions have
been found to improve EFs and to be cost-effective in the long term
(Belfield et al., 2015 ; Heckman & Mosso, 2014 ). Research has shown
that SEL interventions that incorporate mindfulness attention prac-
tices lead to improvements in students’ EFs (Schonert-Reichl et al.,
2015 ). Mindfulness is broadly defined as “self-regulation of atten-
tion to the conscious awareness of one’s immediate experiences while
adopting an attitude of curiosity, openness, and acceptance” (Bishop,
 14677687, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/desc.13403 by Oregon Health & Science Univer, Wiley Online Library on [08/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License